---
layout: post
title: Domesday 86
---

I've been listening to a lot of Cautionary Tales lately - an excellent podcast authored by Tim Harford. I was
drawn in by the thrilling/chilling story of the [Goiânia accident](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Goi%C3%A2nia_accident),
and have gobbled as many as I can since. Only the first season is available on BBC sounds for some reason; there're
many more on Apple podcasts. I've learned about the huge number of suicides resulting from the Fukushima evacuation,
a plane hijacking powered by the Dunning-Kruger effect, plan continuation bias, and how a broken piano forced Keith Jarett to 
play an amazing concert. 

The one I wanted to highlight here was about [archiving](https://omny.fm/shows/cautionary-tales-with-tim-harford/laser-versus-parchment-doomsday-for-the-disc), titled "Laser versus parchment: Doomsday for the disc". One part of the episode talked about the Windrush scandal, and it really helped me realize how
outrageous that was. Simply, in 1948 the law changed to allow people from the UK's colonies to come and live in the UK.
Until the early 1970s when the law changed again, many did. They were given the right to permanently remain, but the only evidence they had
this right was a cardboard card - held by the Home Office - generated when they landed in the UK. During an office move, the collection of these
cards was destroyed. In 2012, the law changed to require employers, landlords, the NHS, and others to check ID and require proof of right to remain.
Windrush generation people, who could have gotten proof of their status from the Home Office, were now told that the Home Office had no record of them and that
they would have to leave. People who'd been here since they were children. Can you imagine being challenged to provide 50 years of official documentation or be
deported to a foreign country? The stink broke out in late 2017, and a compensation fund was set up in 2018. To be administered by the Home Office.

Anyway, on a less dour note, the rest of the episode was on the BBC Domesday 1986 project, which got schools around the country to do some
citizen journalism. The project was recorded on laser discs (like a 30cm CD, but not digital), but has since been preserved in the National Archives. Cautionary Tales
does a good job of telling some of the history. [Daniel Earwicker](https://earwicker.com) has made this much more accessible via a [map interface](https://earwicker.com/dansday86/) and has written an interesting [blog post](https://earwicker.com/Domesday_86_Reloaded_Reloaded.html) about how he did it. I particularly liked the note
about [WSG 84](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/World_Geodetic_System) and the interesting detail of Hawaian volcanoes moving a metre every decade due to tectonic drift.
I had hoped to pick out a few select accounts from the Domesday project, but I've run out of steam so I'll let you click to your interest's focus.